AdhocFilters: Add docs for AdhocFilterSet and AdhocFiltersVariable (#377)
grafana/scenes: docusaurus/docs/advanced-adhoc-fIlters.md

---
id: advanced-adhoc-filters
title: Adhoc filters
---

> Adhoc filters are very powerful ways to dynamically change the scope (filtering) of queries in your scene view. Unlike variables that usually control a predefined label / dimension with adhoc filters

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Adhoc filters provide a very powerful way to dynamically change the scope or filtering of queries in your scene view. Unlike variables, which usually control a predefined label or dimension with adhoc filters,
```

> the user can control what keys (labels) to filter on.

Reviewer: Just wondering if the keys and dimensions are representing the same thing and we can stick to one term.
```suggestion
the user can control which keys (labels) to filter on.
```

## Automically applied to queries

> Adhoc filters are supported directly by many data sources. This means they will handle automtically applying the filters to all the queries that match the data source you specify on the AdhocFilterSet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Adhoc filters are supported directly by many data sources. This means they handle automatically applying filters to all the queries that match the data source you specify on the `AdhocFilterSet`.
```

### Step 1. Create the AdHocFilterSet

> Start by defining the AdHocFilterSet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Start by defining the `AdHocFilterSet`.
```

```ts
const filterSet = new AdHocFilterSet({
  name: 'Filters',
  datasource: {
    type: 'prometheus',
    uid: '<PROVIDE_GRAFANA_DS_UID>',
  },

>   // You do no need to set baseFilters but they are useful if you want to limit label suggestions to only those you deem relevant for the scene.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // You don't need to set baseFilters, but they're useful if you want to limit label suggestions to only those you deem relevant for the scene.
```

>   // These are not shown in the UI

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // These are not shown in the UI.
```

>   baseFilters: [{ key: '__name__', operator: '=', value: 'ALERTS', condition: '' }],

Reviewer 2: An example would be useful for this property

Author: @dprokop the code your commenting on is the example (a very useful example of limiting keys to those of a specific metrics name)

>   // If you want to have any default filters added by default you can specify those here

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // If you want to have any default filters added by default, you can specify those here.
```

  filters: []
});
```

> Next you just add this filterSet to the controls array of your EmbeddedScene or SceneAppPage depending on where you want it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, you add this `filterSet` to the controls array of your `EmbeddedScene` or `SceneAppPage` depending on where you want it.
```

> ### How the automatic mode works

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### How automatic mode works
```

The behavior of `AdHocFilterSet` is controlled by the `applyMode` option. When set to `same-datasource`, which is the default, any change to any filter will automatically re-trigger all

> SceneQueryRunners in the scene that are configured with the same data source uid as the that of the `AdHocFilterSet`. The data source implementation will handle modifying all the queries

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`SceneQueryRunners` in the scene that are configured with the same data source UID as the one of the `AdHocFilterSet`. The data source implementation will handle modifying all the queries
```

to include the current filters.

> ## Customizing the tag and value suggestions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Customize the tag and value suggestions
```

> By default the tag (label) suggestions will come from the data source implementation of `getTagKeys``. Existing filters and `baseFilters`  should be taken into account when suggestions are fetched so that filters

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default the tag (label) suggestions will come from the data source implementation of `getTagKeys`. You should take existing filters and `baseFilters` into account when fetching suggestions so that filters
```

> can also impact the suggested tags and values of other filters. This behavior that other filters are taken into account is new and not all data sources support it yet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
can also impact the suggested tags and values of other filters. This behavior where other filters are taken into account is new and not all data sources support it yet.
```

Values are fetched from the data source implementation of `getTagValues`. Both tag keys and tag values can be customized with the two state properties: `getTagKeysProvider` and `getTagValuesProvider`.

Example:

```ts
const filterSet = new AdHocFilterSet({
  name: 'Filters',
  datasource: {
    type: 'prometheus',
    uid: '<PROVIDE_GRAFANA_DS_UID>',
  },
  getTagKeysProvider: () => {
    return Promise.resolve({
        replace: true,
        values: [
          { text: 'service_namespace', value: 'service_namespace' },
          { text: 'technology', value: 'technology' },
        ]
    });
  },
  getTagValuesProvider: (set: AdHocFilterSet, filter: AdHocVariableFilter) => {
    // Customize value look up
    return Promise.resolve({ replace: false, values: [] });
  },
});
```

> With these two functions you can completely customize the key and value look up. With the replace property on the return object you can control if the result should either replace the default implementation (results) or augment the default result with for example keys/labels from another data source.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With these two functions, you can completely customize the key and value look up. With the `replace` property on the return object, you can control if the result should either replace the default implementation (results) or augment the default result with, for example, keys/labels from another data source.
```

> ## Manual mode and using AdHocFiltersVariable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Manual mode and using `AdHocFiltersVariable`
```

> If you do not want filters to be applied to all queries of the same data source as that of the `AdHocFilterSet` and want more control over which queries it is applied to you can set `applyMode` to `manual` and
> then use the filters how ever you want. You could for example subscribe to the `AdHocFilterSet` state and then use the filters to modify the scene in some interesting way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you don't want filters to be applied to all queries of the same data source as that of the `AdHocFilterSet` and want more control over which queries it's applied to, you can set `applyMode` to `manual` and
then use the filters how ever you want. You could, for example, subscribe to the `AdHocFilterSet` state and then use the filters to modify the scene in some interesting way.
```

> then use the filters how ever you want. You could, for example, subscribe to the `AdHocFilterSet` state and then use the filters to modify the scene in some interesting way.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
then use the filters however you want. You could, for example, subscribe to the `AdHocFilterSet` state and then use the filters to modify the scene in some interesting way.
```

> There's another way you can use the manual mode and that's by way of the `AdHocFiltersVariable`. This object is an alternative to `AdHocFilterSet`. With `AdHocFiltersVariable`, you

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An alternative way to use the manual mode is `AdHocFiltersVariable`. This object is an alternative to `AdHocFilterSet`. With `AdHocFiltersVariable`, you
```

> There is another way you can use the manual mode and that is via the `AdHocFiltersVariable`. This object is an alternative to `AdHocFilterSet`. With `AdHocFiltersVariable` you
> do not add it the controls array you add it to a `SceneVariableSet` as one of your variables. The UI is then rendered as part of `VariableValueSelectors`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There's another way you can use the manual mode and that's by way of the `AdHocFiltersVariable`. This object is an alternative to `AdHocFilterSet`. With `AdHocFiltersVariable`, you
don't add it the controls array but instead add it to a `SceneVariableSet` as one of your variables. The UI is then rendered as part of `VariableValueSelectors`.
```

Example:

```ts
$variables: new SceneVariableSet({
  variables: [
    AdHocFiltersVariable.create({
      datasource: { uid: 'gdev-prometheus' },
      filters: [{ key: 'job', operator: '=', value: 'grafana', condition: '' }],
    }),
  ],
}),
```

> As you can see `AdHocFiltersVariable` should not be created using the normal constructor but the static factory function `AdHocFiltersVariable.create`. This factory function helps create both the variable
> and the inner `AdHocFilterSet` and makes sure the inner set has `applyMode` set to `manual`.
> 
> With this variable you can now use the filters easily in specific queries by using it as a normal variable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As you can see, you shouldn't create `AdHocFiltersVariable` using the normal constructor but the static factory function `AdHocFiltersVariable.create`. This factory function helps create both the variable
and the inner `AdHocFilterSet` and makes sure the inner set has `applyMode` set to `manual`.

With this variable, you can now use the filters easily in specific queries by using it as a normal variable.
```

Example:

```ts
 new SceneQueryRunner({
  datasource: { uid: 'gdev-prometheus' },
  queries: [
    {
      refId: 'A',
      expr: 'ALERTS{$Filters}',
      format: 'table',
      instant: true,
    },
  ],
})
```

> As you can see the query contains the variable expression `$Filters`. The name of the variable is of course something you can change. By default the `AdHocFiltersVariable` will render the filters to valid

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As you can see, the query contains the variable expression `$Filters`. Of course, you can change the name of the variable. By default the `AdHocFiltersVariable` will render the filters to valid
```

> As you can see, the query contains the variable expression `$Filters`. Of course, you can change the name of the variable. By default the `AdHocFiltersVariable` will render the filters to valid

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Such configured query contains the variable expression `$Filters`. You can change the name of the variable. By default, the `AdHocFiltersVariable` will render the filters to valid
```
